Usage
*****

.. include:: replace.txt
.. highlight:: cpp

.. heading hierarchy:
   ------------- Chapter
   ************* Section (#.#)
   ============= Subsection (#.#.#)
   ############# Paragraph (no number)

Building the Module
===================

The ``OFSwitch13`` module was designed to work together with the
``ofsoftswitch13`` library, providing an interface for interconnecting the
|ns3| simulator to the library. To this end, the ``ofsoftswitch13`` project
must be compiled as a *static library* and get proper linked with |ns3|
simulator.

Currently, the user must download and compile the code manually. Follow the
instructions below to compile and link the |ns3| simulator to the
``ofsoftswitch13`` library. *These instructions have been tested on Ubuntu
14.04.3 LTS. Other distributions or versions may require different steps,
specially regarding library compilation.*

Compiling the library
#####################

Before starting, install the following packages on your system:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ sudo apt-get install build-essential gcc g++ python git mercurial unzip cmake
  $ sudo apt-get install libpcap-dev libxerces-c2-dev libpcre3-dev flex bison
  $ sudo apt-get install pkg-config autoconf libtool libboost-dev

First, it is necessary to compile the `ofsoftswitch13` as a static library. The
``ofsoftswitch13`` code relies on another library, called ``NetBee``
(http://www.nbee.org), which is used to parse the network packets. So we need
to compile and install them in the proper order.

Download the `NetBee` and unpack the source code:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ wget https://bitbucket.org/ljerezchaves/ofswitch13-module/downloads/nbeesrc.zip
  $ unzip nbeesrc.zip

Create the build system and compile the library:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ cd netbee/src/
  $ cmake .
  $ make

Add the shared libraries built to your library directory, configure dynamic
linker run-time bindings, and copy the include files:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ sudo cp ../bin/libn*.so /usr/local/lib
  $ sudo ldconfig
  $ sudo cp -R ../include/* /usr/include/

We are done with the ``NetBee`` library. Now, let's proceed with the
``ofsoftswitch13`` code. Clone the repository and update to proper (preferably
latest) release tag at the ``ns3lib`` branch (here, we are using v2.0.x):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ git clone https://github.com/ljerezchaves/ofsoftswitch13
  $ cd ofsoftswitch13
  $ git checkout v2.0.x

Configure and build the library (don't forget to add the ``--enable-ns3-lib``
during configuration process):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ ./boot.sh
  $ ./configure --enable-ns3-lib
  $ make

Once everything gets compiled, the static library ``libns3ofswitch13.a`` will
be available under ``ofsoftswitch13/udatapath/`` directory.

Linking the library to the simulator
####################################

It's time to download a recent (preferably stable) |ns3| code into your
machine (here, we are going to use the mercurial repository for ns-3.24.1):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ hg clone http://code.nsnam.org/ns-3.24
  $ cd ns-3.24
  $ hg update ns-3.24.1

Before configuring and compiling the simulator, download the ``OFSwitch13``
code from the module repository and place it inside a new ``/src/ofswitch13``
folder. Update the code to the latest stable version (here, we are using
2.0.3):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ hg clone https://bitbucket.org/ljerezchaves/ofswitch13-module src/ofswitch13
  $ cd src/ofswitch13
  $ hg update 2.0.3
  $ cd ../../

Also, you need to patch the |ns3| code with the appropriated patches available
under the ``ofswitch13/utils`` directory (use the patches for the correct |ns3|
version):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ patch -p1 < src/ofswitch13/utils/ofswitch13-csma-3_24_1.patch
  $ patch -p1 < src/ofswitch13/utils/ofswitch13-doc-3_24_1.patch

The ``ofswitch13-csma-3_24_1.patch`` creates the new OpenFlow receive callback at
``CsmaNetDevice``, allowing OpenFlow switch to get raw L2 packets from this
device. This is the only required change in the |ns3| code to allow
``OFSwitch13`` usage. The ``ofswitch13-doc-3_24_1.patch`` is optional. It
instructs the simulator to include the module in the |ns3| model library and
source code API documentation, which can be helpful to compile the
documentation using Doxygen and Sphinx.

Now, you can configure the |ns3| including the ``--with-ofswitch13`` option to
show the simulator where it can find the ``ofsoftswitch13`` main directory:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ ./waf configure --with-ofswitch13=path/to/ofsoftswitch13

Check for the enabled |ns3| *OpenFlow 1.3 Integration* feature at the end of
the configuration process. Finally, compile the simulator:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ ./waf

That's it! Enjoy your |ns3| fresh compilation with OpenFlow 1.3 capabilities.

Basic usage
===========

Here is the minimal simulation program that is needed simulate an OpenFlow 1.3
environment. This code connects two hosts to a single switch using CSMA links,
and install the switch and the controller using the ``OFSwitch13Helper``.

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Initial boilerplate
  #include "ns3/core-module.h"
  #include "ns3/network-module.h"
  #include "ns3/internet-module.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-module.h"
  #include "ns3/ofswitch13-module.h"

  using namespace ns3;

  int
  main (int argc, char *argv[])
  {
    // Creating two host nodes
    NodeContainer hosts;
    hosts.Create (2);

    // Create a switch node
    Ptr<Node> switchNode = CreateObject<Node> ();

    // Create a controller node
    Ptr<Node> controllerNode = CreateObject<Node> ();

    // Using a CsmaHelper to connect the host nodes to the switch.
    CsmaHelper csmaHelper;
    NetDeviceContainer hostDevices;
    NetDeviceContainer switchPorts;
    for (size_t i = 0; i < hosts.GetN (); i++)
      {
        NodeContainer pair (hosts.Get (i), switchNode);
        NetDeviceContainer link = csmaHelper.Install (pair);
        hostDevices.Add (link.Get (0));
        switchPorts.Add (link.Get (1));
      }

    // Configure the OpenFlow network, installing the controller and switch
    Ptr<OFSwitch13Helper> of13Helper = CreateObject<OFSwitch13Helper> ();
    of13Helper->InstallDefaultController (controllerNode);
    of13Helper->InstallSwitch (switchNode, switchPorts);

    // Other configurations: TCP/IP stack, apps, monitors, etc.
    // ...

    // Simulate
    Simulator::Stop (Seconds (10));
    Simulator::Run ();
    Simulator::Destroy ();
  }

To run this code, users *must install* the TCP/IP stack into host nodes, assign
IP addresses to host interfaces (don't add IP addresses to the devices that are
used as OpenFlow port), and configure any traffic application. You can also
check for the ``start-ofswitch13.cc`` example, which is very similar to this
code. For instructions on how to compile and run simulation programs, please
refer to the |ns3| tutorial.

Helpers
=======

OFSwitch13Helper
################

The single ``OFSwitch13helper`` follows the pattern usage of normal helpers.
This helper can be used to create and configure an OpenFlow 1.3 network with a
single controller and one or more switches.

With the ``ChannelType`` attribute, it is possible to create an OpenFlow
channel using a single shared CSMA channel (default option), interconnecting
the controller to all switches. It is also possible to create individual
connections between the controller and each switch, using either CSMA or
point-to-point links. For configuring a network with more than one controller,
the ``SetAddressBase()`` can be used to set the network address, network mask
and base address that are used for creating the OpenFlow channel. Using
standard |ns3| channels and devices provide realistic connections with delay
and error models.

For configuring the controller, the ``InstallDefaultController()`` function
creates a new learning controller application and install it into the
controller node. It is possible to install a different controller through the
``InstallControllerApp()`` function. For configuring the switches, the
``InstallSwitch()`` function is used to create a ``OFSwitch13Device``, add the
device to the switch node, and attach the given device container as switch
ports of the switch. Theses ports are the ``CsmaNetDevices`` created during the
connection between the nodes and the switches (connections previously defined
by the user). It is possible to install the switch without ports, using the
``InstallSwitchesWithoutPorts()`` function. In this case, users must add ports
to the switch later, using the ``OFSwitch13Device::AddSwitchPort()``.  Note
that in all cases, the controller *must* be installed by the helper before the
switches.

The helper allows users to enable PCAP and ASCII traces for the OpenFlow
channel through functions ``EnableOpenFlowPcap()`` and
``EnableOpenFlowAscii()``, respectively. It can also enable the library
internal ASCII logs through the ``EnableDatapathLogs()`` function.

Attributes
==========

OFSwitch13Controller
####################

* ``Port``: The port number on which the controller listen for incoming
  packets. This is a read-only attribute, and the default value is port 6653
  (the official IANA port since 2013-07-18).

OFSwitch13Device
###################

* ``DatapathId``: The unique identification of this OpenFlow switch. This is a
  read-only attribute, and the datapath ID is automatically assigned by the
  object constructor.

* ``PortList``: The list of ports available in this switch.

* ``TCAMDelay``: Average time to perform a TCAM operation in pipeline. The
  default value of 30 nanoseconds is the standard TCAM on a NetFPGA. This value
  will be used to calculate the average pipeline delay for packets, based on
  the number of flow entries in the tables.

* ``DatapathTimeout``: The interval time interval between timeout operations on
  pipeline. At each internal, the device checks if any flow in any table is
  timed out and update port status.

* ``ControllerAddr``: The controller ``InetSocketAddress``, used for TCP
  communication between the switch and controller. The default IP 10.100.150.1
  is the one assigned by the helper when installing the controller application.
  For custom installations, change the address accordingly.

* ``LibLogLevel``: Set the ``ofsoftswitch13`` library logging level. Use *none*
  to turn logging off, or use *all* to maximum verbosity. You can also use a
  custom ``ofsoftswitch13`` verbosity argument.

OFSwitch13Port
##############

* ``PortQueue``: The OpenFlow queue to use as the transmission queue in this
  port. This queue will be set for use in the underlying ``CsmaNetDevice``.

OFSwitch13Queue
###############

* ``QueueList``: The list of internal queues associated to this port queue.

* ``Scheduling``: The output queue scheduling algorithm. Currently, only the
  priority algorithm is available.

OFSwitch13Helper
################

* ``ChannelType``: The configuration used to create the OpenFlow channel. Users
  can select between a single shared CSMA connection, of dedicated connection
  between the controller and each switch, using CSMA or point-to-point links.

* ``ChannelDataRate``: The data rate to be used for the OpenFlow channel.

Output
======

This module relies on the |ns3| tracing subsystem for output. The helper allow
users to enable PCAP and ASCII traces for the ``CsmaNetDevices`` used as switch
ports and for the OpenFlow channel. It is also possible to enable the internal
``ofsoftswitch13`` library ASCII logging mechanism, using the
``EnableDatapathLogs()`` helper function for all devices, or the
``SetLibLogLevel()`` device function for individual device logging.

For using ASCII traces it is necessary to manually include the
``ns3::PacketMetadata::Enable ()`` at the beginning of the program, before any
packets are sent.

.. _port-coding:

Porting |ns3| OpenFlow code
===========================

For |ns3| OpenFlow users that want to port existing code to the new
``OFSwitch13`` module, keep in mind that this is not an extension of the
available implementation. For simulation scenarios using the existing |ns3|
OpenFlow module configured with the ``ns3::OpenFlowSwitchHelper`` helper and
using the ``ns3::ofi::LearningController``, it is possible to port the code to
the ``OFSwitch13`` with little effort. The following code, based on the
``openflow-switch.cc`` example, is used for demonstration:

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Including module headers
  #include "ns3/openflow-module.h"

  // Connecting the terminals to the switchNode using CSMA devices and channels.
  // CsmaNetDevices created at the switchNode are in the switchDevices container.
  // ...

  // Create the OpenFlow helper
  OpenFlowSwitchHelper ofHelper;

  // Create the learning controller app
  Ptr<ns3::ofi::LearningController> controller;
  controller = CreateObject<ns3::ofi::LearningController> ();
  if (!timeout.IsZero ())
    {
      controller->SetAttribute ("ExpirationTime", TimeValue (timeout));
    }

  // Install the switch device, ports and set the controller
  ofHelper.Install (switchNode, switchDevices, controller);

  // Other configurations: TCP/IP stack, apps, monitors, etc.
  // ...

This is the "core" OpenFlow configuration part. Here, the user is creating an
``ns3::ofi::LearningController`` object instance to be used as the controller.
It also set the internal attribute ``ExpirationTime`` that is used for cache
timeout. Then, the helper is used to install the OpenFlow switch device into
the ``switchNode`` node. The CSMA devices from ``switchDevices`` container are
installed as OpenFlow ports, and the ``controller`` object is set as the
OpenFlow controller for the network. The following code implements the same
logic in the ``OFSwitch13`` module:

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Including module headers
  #include "ns3/ofswitch13-module.h"

  // Connecting the terminals to the switchNode using CSMA devices and channels.
  // CsmaNetDevices created at the switchNode are in the switchDevices container.
  // ...

  // Create the OpenFlow 1.3 helper
  Ptr<OFSwitch13Helper> of13Helper = CreateObject<OFSwitch13Helper> ();

  // Create the controller node and install the learning controller app into it
  Ptr<Node> controllerNode = CreateObject<Node> ();
  of13Helper->InstallDefaultController (controllerNode);

  // Install the switch device and ports.
  of13Helper->InstallSwitch (switchNode, switchDevices);

  // Other configurations: TCP/IP stack, apps, monitors, etc.
  // ...

  // Arbitrary simulation duration (can be changed for any value)
  Simulator::Stop (Seconds (10));

Note that the ``OFSwitch13`` module requires a new node to install the
controller into it. The ``InstallDefaultController()`` function will create the
learning application object instance and will install it in the
``controllerNode``. Then, the ``InstallSwitch()`` function will install the
OpenFlow device into ``switchNode``, configure the CSMA devices from
``switchDevices`` container as OpenFlow ports, and configure the connection
between the switch and the controller. Note that the
``OFSwitch13LearningController`` doesn't provide the ``ExpirationTime``
attribute. Don't forget to include the ``Simulator::Stop()`` command to
schedule the time delay until the Simulator should stop, otherwise the
simulation will never end.

For users who have implemented new controllers in the |ns3| OpenFlow module,
extending the ``ns3::ofi::Controller`` class, are encouraged to explore the
examples and the Doxygen documentation for the ``OFSwitch13Controller`` base
class. In a nutshell, the ``ReceiveFromSwitch()`` function is replaced by the
internal handlers, used to process each type of OpenFlow message received from
the switch. See the :ref:`extending-controller` section for more details.

Advanced Usage
==============

``dpctl`` commands
##################

For constructing OpenFlow messages and send to the switches, the controller
relies on the ``dpctl`` utility to simplify the process. This is a management
utility that enable some control over the OpenFlow switch. With this tool it is
possible to add flows to the flow table, query for switch features and status,
and change other configurations.

Check the `utility documentation
<https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/wiki/Dpctl-Documentation>`_ for details
on how to create the commands. Note that the documentation is intended for
terminal usage in Unix systems, which is a little different from the usage in
the ``DpctlCommand()`` function. For this module, ignore the options and switch
reference, and consider only the command and the arguments.

.. _extending-controller:

Extending the controller
########################

The ``OFSwitch13Controller`` base class provides the basic interface for
controller implementation. For sending OpenFlow messages to the switches, there
are functions for *barrier request* and *echo request* messages.  Furthermore,
the ``DpctlCommand()`` function can be used by derived controllers to convert a
variety of ``dpctl`` commands into OpenFlow messages and send it to the target
switch.

The controller uses OpenFlow message handlers to process different OpenFlow
message received from the switches. Some handler methods can not be modified by
derived class (like echo request and reply), as they must behave as already
implemented. Other handlers can be overridden by derived controllers to proper
handle packets sent from switch to controller and implement the desired control
logic. The current implementation of these virtual handler methods does
nothing: just free the received message and returns 0. Note that handlers
*must* free received messages (msg) when everything is fine. For
``HandleMultipartReply()`` implementation, note that there are several types of
multipart replies that can be filtered.

In the ``OFSwitch13LearningController`` implementation, the
``HandlePacketIn()`` function is used to handle packet-in messages sent from
switch to this controller. It look for L2 switching information, update the
structures and send a packet-out back to the switch. The
``HandleFlowRemoved()`` is used to handle expired flow entries notified by the
switch to this controller. It looks for L2 switching information and removes
associated entry.

The ``QosController`` example includes a non-trivial controller implementation
that is used to configure the network described in :ref:`qos-controller`
section. Several ``dpctl`` commands are used to configure the switches based on
network topology and desired control logic, while the ``HandlePacketIn()`` is
used to filter packets sent to the controller by the switch. Note that the
``ofsoftswitch13`` function ``oxm_match_lookup()`` is used across the code to
extract match information from the message received by the controller. For
ARP messages, ``HandleArpPacketIn()`` exemplifies how to create a new packet at
the controller and send to the network over a packet-out message. Developers
are encouraged to study the library internal structures to better understand
the handlers' implementation.

External controller
###################

Considering that the OpenFlow messages traversing the OpenFlow channel follows
the standard wire format, it is possible to use the |ns3| ``TapBridge`` module
to integrate an external OpenFlow 1.3 controller, running on the local system,
to the simulated environment. The experimental ``external-controller.cc``
example was designed to provide this integration. However, this example has not
been tested and validated yet.

Examples
========

The examples are located in ``src/ofswitch13/examples``.

Straightforward examples
########################

Some simple examples for beginners are described below:

* **chain-ofswitch13.cc**: Two hosts connected by a chain of N OpenFlow
  switches with a single controller. Traffic flows from host H0 to H1 through
  all switches.

* **start-ofswitch13.cc**: N hosts connected to a single switch with a single
  controller. Traffic flows between two random hosts.

* **dual-controller.cc**: Four switches connected in line, with a single node
  attached to each one. The first pair of switches are managed by a first
  controller while the other pair are managed by a second controller. Traffic
  flows from host H0 to host H2.

* **external-controller.cc**: (*experimental example*) A single switch
  connected to a external controller over a ``TapBridge``. The default
  configuration expects a controller on you local machine at port 6653. *This
  example requires more tests and validation.*

.. _qos-controller:

QoS controller example
######################

A case study scenario was used by [Chaves2016]_ to demonstrate how some of the
available OpenFlow 1.3 module features can be employed to improve network
management. Figure :ref:`fig-network-topo` shows the network topology used in
this example. It represents the internal network of an organization, where
servers and client nodes are located far from each other (e.g. in separated
buildings). The "long-distance" connection between the sites is via two links
of 10 Mbps each, while all the other local connections are 100 Mbps. On the
server side, the *OpenFlow border switch* acts as a border router element: it
is responsible for handling connection requests coming from the clients, and
redirecting them to the appropriate internal server. On the client side, the
*OpenFlow client switch* is used to interconnect all clients in a star
topology. Between these two switches, there is the *OpenFlow aggregation
switch*, located at the border of the client side and used to provide
long-distance improved communication. The default ``OFSwitch13`` learning
controller is used to manage the client switch, whereas the new *OpenFlow QoS
controller* is used to manage the other two switches. The latter controller
implements some QoS functionalities exploiting OpenFlow 1.3 features, as
described below. Each client opens a single TCP connection with one of the 2
available servers, and sends packets in uplink direction as much as possible,
trying to fill the available bandwidth.

.. _fig-network-topo:

.. figure:: figures/ofswitch13-qos-topology.*
   :align: center

   Network topology for QoS controller example

**Link aggregation**:
The link aggregation can be used to combine multiple network connections in
parallel in order to increase throughput beyond what a single connection could
sustain. To implement the link aggregation, the OpenFlow group table can be
used to split the traffic.

OpenFlow groups were introduced in OpenFlow 1.1 as a way to perform more
complex operations on packets that cannot be defined within a flow alone. Each
group receives packets as input and performs any OpenFlow actions on these
packets. The power of a group is that it contains separate lists of actions,
and each individual action list is referred to as an OpenFlow bucket. There are
different types of groups, and the *select* group type can be used to
perform link aggregation. Each bucket in a select group has an assigned
weight, and each packet that enters the group is sent to a single bucket. The
bucket selection algorithm is undefined and is dependent on the switch's
implementation (the ``ofsoftswitch13`` library implements the weighted round
robin algorithm).

In the proposed network topology, the QoS controller configures both the border
and the aggregation switches to perform link aggregation over the two
narrowband long-distance connections, providing a 20 Mbps connection between
servers and clients (use the ``QosController::LinkAggregation`` attribute to
enable/disable this feature). Each OpenFlow bucket has the same weight in the
select group, so the load is evenly distributed among the links.

**Load balancing**:
A load balancing mechanism can be used to distribute workloads across multiple
servers. Among many goals, it aims to optimize resource use and avoid overload
of any single server. One of the most commonly used applications of load
balancing is to provide a single Internet service from multiple servers,
sometimes known as a server farm.

In the proposed network topology, the OpenFlow QoS controller configures
the border switch to listen for new requests on the IP}and port where
external clients connect to access the servers. The switch forwards the new
request to the controller, which will decide which of the internal servers
must take care of this connection. Then, it install the match rules into border
switch to forward the subsequent packets from the same connection directly to
the chosen server. All this happen without the client ever knowing about the
internal separation of functions.

To implement this load balancing mechanism, the QoS controller depends on
the extensible match support introduced in OpenFlow 1.2. Prior versions of the
OpenFlow specification used a static fixed length structure to specify matches,
which prevents flexible expression of matches and prevents the inclusion of new
match fields. The extensible match support allows the switch to match ARP
request messages looking for the server IP address and redirect them to
the controller, which will create the ARP reply message and send it back
to the network. The set-field action is used by the border switch to
rewrite packet headers, replacing source/destinations IP addresses for
packets leaving/entering the server farm.

**Per-flow meters**:
OpenFlow meter table, introduced in OpenFlow 1.3, enables the switch to
implement various simple QoS operations. A meter measures the rate of packets
assigned to it and enables controlling the rate of those packets. The meter
triggers a meter band if the packet rate or byte rate passing through the meter
exceeds a predefined threshold. If the meter band drops the packet, it is
called a rate limiter.

To illustrate the meter table usage, the OpenFlow QoS controller can optionally
limit each connection throughput to a predefined data rate threshold,
installing meter rules at the border switch along with the load balancing flow
entries (use the ``QosController::EnableMeter`` and ``MeterRate`` attributes to
enable/disable this feature).


Troubleshooting
===============

* If your simulation go into an infinite loop, check for the required
  ``Simulator::Stop()`` command to schedule the time delay until the Simulator
  should stop.

* Note that the Spanning Tree Protocol part of 802.1D is not implemented in the
  ``OFSwitch13LearningController``. Therefore, you have to be careful not to
  create bridging loops, or else the network will collapse.

* For simulating scenarios with more than one OpenFlow controller configured
  with the ``OFSwtich13Helper``, use a different helper instance for each
  controller, and don't forget to change the default controller address with
  the ``SetAddressBase()``. Note that the current implementation don't support
  multiple controller, so each switch must be associated with a single
  controller.

* For using ASCII traces it is necessary to manually include the
  ``ns3::PacketMetadata::Enable ()`` at the beginning of the program, before
  any packets are sent.

